Although this chapter on AV block look short and relatively simple it is actually high-heeled for both testing and
Clinical purposes
The AV conduction system includes the AV node bundle of His
Bundle branches
Therefore we are concerned with the connection between the Atria and the ventricles
So we will focus on the PR interval
Impaired conduction through the AV conduction system is broken up into first
Second and third degree AV block
Rocks which indicate increasing severity
These blocks are generally caused by ischemia infarction of the conduction system
Age-related chronic degeneration of the conduction system
Or medications
Here in the northeastern United States
It is crucial to know the AV block is one of the
Feared consequences of Lyme's disease
Although it is usually reversible with treatment
First degree AV block is simply a delay at the AV node that prolongs the time between atrial depolarization and
Ventricular depolarization
This appears as a prolonged PR interval
Beyond 200 milliseconds are 5 small boxes
Is completely benign and asymptomatic and it does not require treatment
First degree AV block is very common
And is often due to a reversible ischemia and infarction or age-related degeneration
However certain medications
Can cause reversible delay at the AV node
For example beta-blockers and non dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers slow conduction through the AV node
This is water used in a fee
To limit the ventricular rate when the Atria are firing frantically
So first degree AV block is actually unintended consequence of his Medicaid
I'm this ECG the start of the P wave to the start of the QRS complex spans about 7 small boxes
Since each small box equals 40 milliseconds 7 small boxes corresponds to a PR interval
I'm about 280
This is significantly prolonged and indicates first degree AV block
Second degree AV block is characterized by intermittent failure of the AV conduction system
This causes dropped Beats
Which is when an atrial impulse is not conducted through to The ventricle
Which appears as a P wave followed by no corresponding QRS complex
Second degree AV block
Is broken
Into mobitz type 1 and mobitz type 2
Mobitz type 1 second degree AV block is also called a wonky Bock block
With each consecutive beat the PR interval grows longer and longer as the AV delay worsens
Then there was a drop beat indicating AV node failure
After the drop beat the cycle starts fresh as the PR interval returns to its original duration
The great mnemonic cuz
Longer longer longer block now you have a wenckebach
Which describes the progressive lengthening of the PR interval preceding the drop beat
Lucky block block
Is also benign and usually asymptomatic and does not require any treatment
It can be totally normal and children or trained athletes with increased vagal tone
The patient is experiencing bothersome symptoms
Medications or pacemaker can be considered but this is rarely necessary
Look at the Rhythm strip for lead II on the ccg
The first beat has a very short PR interval
Second beat has a PR interval of about 8 small boxes
And the third beat has a PR interval of about 10 small boxes
Then you see a P wave with a long pause afterwards
Which represents the dropped beat
And then the cycle restarts with a short PR interval again
This is the longer longer longer block of wenckebach
If you'd like
Pause the video and use the calipers in the interface
To convince yourself of the change in the PR interval
Mobitz type 2 second degree AV block is diagnosed when there is one or more drop beats
Without the preceding lengthening of the PR interval
The PR interval is relatively constant
And then there's a P wave with no corresponding QRS complex
There may be a fixed ratio of conducted p waves to non conductor
And p waves
For example 3 to 1 ratio would have
Three p waves followed by QRS and then one P wave not fall by QRS
When there are two sequential drop beats
This is called high-grade AV block
Importantly
The block is typically below the AV node in the bundle of hiss or Beyond which causes the QRS to be widened
Mobitz type 2 can suddenly progressed
Third degree heart block
Which is dangerous
Therefore these patients
Require treatment with a permanent pacemaker even if they are completely asymptomatic
Now look at the Rhythm strip
Believe the one on this ECG
The PR interval remains constant at around 5 small boxes
After the 4th QRS complex
You see a P wave
Followed by a long pause
This dropbeat that is not preceded by lengthening of the PR interval
Is diagnostic of second degree AV block mobitz type 2
This patient is at risk
Progression to third degree AV block and requires close monitoring and a pacemaker
Third degree AV block is also called complete heart block
It occurs when the connection between the Atria and the ventricles is completely blocked
So that none of the atrial impulses are conducted
2 through the ventricles causing the Atria and ventricles
The contract independent
The heart has many locations with prominent pacemaker activity
However the SA node Fires at the fastest rate
So it normally dominates and suppresses all other pacemaker activity
If the SA node and the AV node cannot activate the ventricles
The ventricles are activated by Escape Beats
Meaning that the distal conducting system or cardiac myocytes themselves
Initiating info
This is exactly how the ventricles are activated in complete heart block
If the proximal bundle of His acts as a pacemaker for the ventricles
The QRS complex will be narrow
At a rate of 40 to 60 beats per minute
And this is called a junctional Escape worth
If the pacemaker is even more distal
The QRS complex will be widened
And the ventricular rate will be 20 to 40 beats per minute
This is called ventricular Escape rhythm
So in complete heart block the SA node activates the Atria at a normal rate
But these impulses cannot reach the bench
So the Escape Rhythm activates the bench goals at a slow rate that is unrelated to the atrial rate
This appears on an ECG as p waves
With no relationship to the QRS complex
Which is called AV dissociation
The Atria and ventricles contract simultaneously
Causing the p-wave to be hidden within the QRS come
Unlike the other degrees of Av block complete heart block will almost always be symptomatic
Ventricular Escape beats are too slow to maintain cardiac output
Two patients typically experience symptomatic bradycardia causing
Fatigue
Dyspnea chest pain pre syncope syncope
Or even cardiac arrest
Slower ventricular rates are associated with more severe symptoms
And patients with underlying heart disease will have a more severe presentation
Patients with heart failure may present with an acute exacerbation of the heart failure Sim
If a patient is hemodynamically unstable
Then they should be treated with IV at
Caffeine and transcutaneous or transvenous pacing
Once stabilized
Look for reversible causes
If the heart block is deemed irreversible
Then a permanent pacemaker should be implanted
To maintain an adequate ventricular rate
This example shows beautiful AV dissociation
Especially in the Rhythm strip for lead to
Identify all of the p waves and QRS complexes in the Rhythm strip
If you use the calipers in the interface you'll notice that the P2P interval and QRS QRS interval
Wisconsin
The Atria are Contracting at a completely steady rate
With two-and-a-half large boxes between them
And the ventricles are Contracting at a different study rate
The calipers will help you identify where the hidden p waves are buried within the QRS complex
So it looks like the ventricles are being activated
Completely independently from the Atria
I can't find any pattern that explains the relationship between the p waves and the QRS complexes
Therefore we have the AV dissociation of complete heart block
The QRS complex is narrow
So we know the ventricles are being activated by junctional Escape Rhythm originating at the proximal bundle of His
That means the Escape Rhythm should be about 40 to 60 beats per minute
And what do you know it's exactly 50 beats per minute
My favorite part of this ECG is that it also tells you
The cause of the heart block
I know we haven't gone over ischemia yet but perhaps you notice the st-elevation the inferior leads
2 3 and avf
This likely indicates an infarction in the territory supplied by the RCA
Since the RCA gives off branches that feed the AV node
Then an RCA lesion can cause infarction of the AV node which caused complete AV node Block in this case
So this ECG gave me the diagnosis of complete heart block
As well as the etiology
RCA infarction that involves the AV nodal artery